Adenoviruses are DNA viruses that naturally infect many vertebrates, including humans and monkeys, and cause a wide range of clinical illnesses in humans. Infection from individual strains has conventionally been thought to be species- specific. Here we applied the Virochip, a pan-viral microarray, to identify a novel adenovirus (TMAdV, titi monkey adenovirus) as the cause of a deadly outbreak in a closed colony of New World monkeys (titi monkeys; Callicebus cupreus) at the California National Primate Research Center (CNPRC). Among 65 titi monkeys housed in a building, 23 (34%) developed upper respiratory symptoms that progressed to fulminant pneumonia and hepatitis, and 19 of 23 monkeys, or 83% of those infected, died or were humanely euthanized. Whole-genome sequencing of TMAdV revealed that this adenovirus is a new species and highly divergent, sharing ,57% pairwise nucleotide identity with other adenoviruses. Cultivation of TMAdV was successful in a human A549 lung adenocarcinoma cell line, but not in primary or established monkey kidney cells. At the onset of the outbreak, the researcher in closest contact with the monkeys developed an acute respiratory illness, with symptoms persisting for 4 weeks, and had a convalescent serum sample seropositive for TMAdV. A clinically ill family member, despite having no contact with the CNPRC, also tested positive, and screening of a set of 81 random adult blood donors from the Western United States detected TMAdV-specific neutralizing antibodies in 2 individuals (2/81, or 2.5%). These findings raise the possibility of zoonotic infection by TMAdV and human-to-human transmission of the virus in the population. Given the unusually high case fatality rate from the outbreak (83%), it is unlikely that titi monkeys are the native host species for TMAdV, and the natural reservoir of the virus is still unknown. The discovery of TMAdV, a novel adenovirus with the capacity to infect both monkeys and humans, suggests that adenoviruses should be monitored closely as potential causes of cross-species outbreaks.  Adenoviruses, first isolated in the 1950s from explanted adenoid tissue, are double-stranded nonenveloped DNA viruses that naturally infect many vertebrates, including humans and nonhu- man primates. The human adenoviruses in the Mastadenovirus genus, comprised of all mammalian adenoviruses, are classified into 7 species A-G, and at least 51 different serotypes (and 5 proposed types, HAdV-52 to HAdV-56) have been described to date [1,2]. Adenoviruses are the cause of an estimated 5–10% of febrile illnesses in children worldwide [3]. Some serotypes, such as human adenovirus type 14 (HAdV-14), have been associated with severe and potentially fatal outbreaks of pneumonia in residential facilities and military bases [4]. Adenoviruses have also been associated with other clinical syndromes including conjunctivitis, hepatitis, and diarrhea [5]. In nonhuman primates, most epidemiologic studies of adenoviruses have focused on their identification in fecal samples from asymptomatic animals [6,7,8]. Overt respiratory disease associated with simian adenoviruses has also been observed [9]. Although adenoviruses are significant pathogens, genetically modified strains are being actively explored as potential vectors for vaccines and gene therapy [10].
Infection by adenoviruses has generally been thought to be species-specific. Human adenoviruses do not usually replicate in monkey cells in the absence of helper viruses [11], and do not productively infect rodents (and vice versa) [12]. Studies of sera from animal handlers and zoo workers exposed to chimpanzees in captivity fail to detect antibodies to chimpanzee adenoviruses [13,14]. However, recent serological surveys have found antibod- ies to New World and Old World monkey adenoviruses in donor human sera from regions where the monkeys are endemic [14,15]. In addition, phylogenetic analyses of adenoviruses from greater apes reveal that they fall precisely into ‘‘human’’ adenoviral species B, C, and E [7]. The high degree of sequence relatedness within members of each species suggests that at least some adenoviral strains may be capable of infecting both nonhuman primates and humans.
Beginning in May of 2009, a deadly outbreak of fulminant pneumonia and hepatitis occurred in a closed colony of New World titi monkeys of the Callicebus genus at the California National Primate Research Center (CNPRC). Routine microbi- ological testing for an infectious etiology was negative. We previously developed the Virochip (University of California, San Francisco) as a broad-spectrum surveillance assay for identifying viral causes of unknown acute and chronic illnesses [16,17,18,19,20,21,22]. The Virochip, a pan-viral microarray containing ,19,000 probes derived from all viral species in GenBank (n,2500) [21,23], has been previously successful in detection of novel outbreak viruses such as the SARS coronavirus [22,24] and the 2009 pandemic H1N1 influenza virus [23]. Here we apply the Virochip to identify a novel and highly divergent adenovirus as the cause of the titi monkey outbreak. In addition, we present clinical and serological evidence that this virus may have infected a researcher at the CNPRC and a family member, An outbreak of fulminant pneumonia in a titi monkey colony
In early 2009, the CNPRC housed 65 titi monkeys in one quadrant of an animal building. The index case, a healthy adult titi monkey, presented on May 14, 2009 with cough, lethargy, and decreased appetite (Fig. 1A, T1). Despite aggressive treatment with intravenous fluids and antibiotics, the animal developed severe respiratory distress and was humanely euthanized 5 days later. A second case presented 4 weeks later near the entrance to the building (Fig. 1A, T54). In the interim period, 3 healthy titi monkeys had been relocated from a separate building (Fig. 1A, T2, T3, and T19), with 2 of the 3 monkeys placed into the cage formerly occupied by the index case, reflecting a total at-risk population of 68. Over the ensuing 2 months, 21 additional monkeys, including one of the relocated monkeys, presented with clinical signs similar to those shown by the index case (attack rate =23/68, or 34%) (Figs. 1A and 1B). Clinical signs in affected animals included cough, lethargy, poor appetite, tachypnea, and abdominal breathing. These symptoms progressed to overt respiratory distress and death or humane euthanasia within an average of 8 days. Chest radiographs typically revealed diffuse interstitial pulmonary changes and bronchoalveolar consolidation indicative of pneumonia, with right middle lobe predominance (Fig. 1C). Animals displaying clinical signs were quarantined and aggressively treated by veterinarians with supplemental oxygen, anti-inflammatory medications, bronchodilators (nebulized albu- terol), broad-spectrum antibiotics, and antivirals (oseltamivir and/ or ribavirin). In total, 19 animals died or were euthanized due to the illness during the outbreak (case fatality rate = 19/23, or 83%). Only 4 monkeys survived, even though the majority of sick animals (17/23, or 74%) consisted of apparently healthy adults and juveniles. Interestingly, none of the 133 rhesus macaques (Macaca mulatta) housed in the same building became sick during the outbreak, and neither did any of the Old World monkeys from surrounding outdoor colonies of rhesus and cynomolgus macaques (Macaca fascicularis).
Gross necropsy findings were similar in all titi monkeys and were characterized primarily by diffuse, consolidated pneumonias, with occasional evidence of fibrinous pleuritis, pericardial/pleural edema, and hemorrhage (Fig. 1D-1). Some livers, spleens, and lymph nodes were found to be abnormally enlarged. Hepatic necrosis and hemorrhage, along with ascites, were occasionally appreciated. On histologic examination, the normal cellular architecture of the lung and trachea was destroyed, and prominent intranuclear inclusion bodies were observed in the liver, lung, and trachea (Figs. 1D-2 and 1D-3).
A routine microbiological workup for infectious causes of the outbreak, including bacterial, mycoplasma, and fungal cultures, was negative. Respiratory viral testing failed to detect evidence of respiratory syncytial virus, adenovirus, influenza virus A and B, human metapneumovirus, and parainfluenza virus types 1, 2, and 3.

Given the clinical presentation of a severe acute viral respiratory illness and the appearance of intranuclear inclusion bodies on histological examination, we strongly suspected that a virus that had eluded detection by conventional assays was the cause of the titi monkey outbreak. Nasal, lung, and liver swab samples collected during necropsy were analyzed using the Virochip [21,23]. Microarrays were analyzed using ranked Z-scores to assess the highest-intensity viral probes [18]. From a lung swab sample from an affected monkey, 4 of the top 80 probes on the Virochip corresponded to adenoviruses. Other viruses or viral families with $4 probes among the top 80, including chimpanzee herpesvirus (Herpesviridae), bovine viral diarrhea virus (Flaviviridae), and endogenous retroviruses (Retroviridae), were regarded as less likely to cause fulminant pneumonia and hepatitis, so were not pursued any further. The 4 adenovirus probes mapped to 2 different gene regions corresponding to the DNA polymerase and penton base

To explore a potential link between the outbreak and associated illness in humans, we blindly tested available sera from titi monkeys (n=59), rhesus macaques housed in the same building (n = 36), CNPRC personnel and close contacts (n = 20), and random human blood donors (n=81) for evidence of recent or prior infection by TMAdV by virus neutralization (Fig. 6). Nineteen serum samples from 15 at-risk affected (symptomatic) titi monkeys were tested. Among 3 affected titi monkeys surviving the outbreak, 2 monkeys mounted a vigorous neutralizing Ab response to TMAdV, with negative pre-outbreak Ab titers (,1:8) but antibody titers 2 months after the outbreak of .1:512, while 1 monkey exhibited a positive but much weaker response. Affected titi monkeys who died during the outbreak exhibited a wide range of neutralizing Ab titers, from ,1:8 to .1:512 (those without Ab likely died before mounting a response).
To investigate the possibility of subclinical infection by TMAdV, we also examined serum samples from asymptomatic titi monkeys (n = 40) and nearby rhesus macaques (n = 36), collected 2 months after the outbreak. Fourteen of 40 asymptom- atic titi monkeys tested (35%) had antibody to TMAdV, indicating that the incidence of subclinical infection was significant (Fig. 1A; Fig 6). In fact, one of the 14 asymptomatic titi monkeys with positive Ab titers was located in the minimal-risk building. In contrast, only 1 of 36 rhesus macaque samples was positive, with an Ab titer of 1:16. The 1 antibody-positive rhesus serum sample was negative by specific PCR for TMAdV (data not shown), as was stool from the cage in which the rhesus monkey was housed (Table 1).
Approximately 4 months after the outbreak, serum samples were collected from CNPRC personnel in direct contact with the titi monkeys. Serum samples were also collected from the two family members of the clinically ill CNPRC researcher 1 year after the outbreak. Only two samples were found positive for neutralizing Abs to TMAdV: (1) Ab titers for the clinically ill researcher were 1:32, and (2) Ab titers for one of the family members of the clinically ill researcher were 1:8.
Among 81 random blood donors from the Western United States, 2 individuals (2/81, 2.5%) had positive Ab titers of 1:16 and 1:8. Pooled rabbit sera containing antibodies to human adenovirus serotypes 1 through 35, representing species A–E, were unable to neutralize TMAdV (data not shown). Thus, the results of our serological survey appear unlikely to be due to nonspecific cross- reactivity from prior exposure to known human adenoviruses. In this study, we employed a pan-viral microarray assay, the Virochip, to identify a novel adenovirus associated with a fulminant pneumonia outbreak in a colony of New World titi monkeys. Despite the absence of an animal model, which precludes a strict fulfillment of Koch’s postulates, there are several lines of evidence implicating this novel adenovirus, TMAdV, as the cause of the outbreak. First, conventional testing for other pathogens, including other viruses by Virochip, was negative, and affected monkeys did not respond to empiric therapy with antibiotics or antivirals (ribavirin and oseltamivir in anecdotal use are not effective against adenoviral infections) [30]. Second, the clinical presentation of pneumonia and hepatitis is consistent with the known spectrum of disease associated with adenoviral infections. Third, TMAdV sequence was recovered by PCR in various body fluids and tissues from affected monkeys, including blood, respiratory secretions, and lung/liver tissue (Table 1). Fourth, the finding of intranuclear inclusions in diseased tissues, as well as direct visualization of adenoviral-like particles (TMAdV) in lung alveoli by electron microscopy (Figs. 1D-2 to 1D-4), support a primary role for TMAdV in the pathogenesis of tissue injury in affected monkeys. Finally, there was a significant neutralizing Ab response in surviving animals, with 2 monkeys having titers undetectable prior to the outbreak but rising to .1:512 at convalescence (Fig. 6).
Although TMAdV retains the core genomic features common to all adenoviruses (Fig. 2C), phylogenetic analysis clearly places TMAdV within a separate branch, with no closely related neighbors (Figs. 3 and S1). A phylogenetic distance of .10% combined with the lack of cross-neutralization defines TMAdV as a new species [31]. Since emerging adenovirus strains such as HAdV-14 and HAdV-D22/H8 (otherwise known as HAdV-D53) are known to arise from recombination events among related ancestral strains [32,33], we performed bootscanning analysis to look for such events in TMAdV. The bootscanning analysis, however, failed to show evidence of recombination, likely because closely related and/or ancestral strains to TMAdV have not yet been identified.
Entry of adenoviruses into cells involves an initial attachment of the fiber knob to the cell receptor, followed by internalization via a secondary interaction of the penton base with av integrins [34,35]. The presence of an RGD motif in the TMAdV penton base implies that the virus uses av integrins for internalization [35]. However, the high sequence divergence in the fiber protein (Table 2), as well as the absence of fiber motifs conserved among adenoviruses that bind CAR [36,37] (coxsackievirus-adenovirus receptor) or CD46 [38,39,40] (data not shown), suggest that neither of these two human adenoviral receptors may be the attachment receptor for TMAdV. Further studies will be necessary to identify the preferred cellular attachment and internalization receptors for TMAdV. Despite its isolation from affected titi monkeys, we were unable to propagate TMAdV in both established (BSC-1) and primary (PMK) monkey kidney cells (Fig. 4). The virus, however, grew efficiently in a human A549 lung adenocarcinoma cell line. One explanation for this finding is that TMAdV may be unable to productively infect cells derived from Old World monkeys (e.g. rhesus and African green monkeys). An alternative possibility is that successful propagation of TMAdV may depend on infection of a specific host cell type, such as A549 lung, and not BSC-1 or PMK kidney cells. Nevertheless, after 10 passages in human A549 cells, the fully adapted strain of TMAdV exhibits an extended host range with the ability to productively infect both monkey and human cells. This observation implies that TMAdV possesses an inherent capacity to cross the species barrier and infect both humans and nonhuman primates. Efforts to identify host range and cell tropism of TMAdV, as well as the specific sequence changes responsible for adaptation to growth in cell culture, are currently underway.
The virulence of TMAdV in healthy and apparently immuno- competent titi monkeys (83% case fatality rate) is highly unusual for infections by adenovirus. In humans, deaths due to adenovirus infections or outbreaks are generally low (up to 18% for pneumonia associated with HAdV-14 [4]). Furthermore, severe infections from human adenoviruses are more commonly associated with older age, immunosuppression, and chronic underlying conditions such as kidney failure [4,41]. Young, healthy individuals are in general much less likely to succumb to adenoviral-related illness. The severity of TMAdV-related illness in affected titi monkeys suggests that this species of monkey may not be the natural host for the virus. The failure to detect fecal shedding of TMAdV in convalescent or asymptomatic animals also suggests that the virus does not normally infect titi monkeys (Table 1).
Although the exact origin of TMAdV remains unclear, we can speculate on several possibilities. One possibility is that a cross- species ‘‘jump’’ from captive macaques to a susceptible colony of titi monkeys precipitated the outbreak. As there have been no new introductions of monkeys into the closed colony for the past 2 years, this conjecture relies on asymptomatic infection and transmission of TMAdV in the captive rhesus/cynomolgus macaque population at the CNPRC. CNPRC personnel who visited macaque areas would occasionally enter titi rooms with no change in personal protective equipment, thus providing a potential route of transmission for the virus. In addition, specific antibodies were detected in 1 of 36 (2.8%) asymptomatic rhesus macaques housed in the same building (Fig. 6), indicating that TMAdV has the capacity to infect this species of Old World monkey. Notably, the closest identified phylogenetic relative to TMAdV among the complete genomic sequences available in GenBank is a rhesus monkey adenovirus, SAdV-3 (Fig. 4; Table 2). Furthermore, serological evidence for cross-species adenoviral transmission events between different nonhuman primate species has been previously reported in the literature [42]. Although we failed to detect TMAdV in rodent droppings found near titi monkey cages (Table 2), it is still possible that the virus arose from an unknown animal reservoir. In this regard, the high sequence divergence of TMAdV relative to the known human/simian adenoviruses (Fig. 3), and comparable sequence similarity in the polymerase gene to a porcine adenovirus (Figs. 3 and S1) are striking. The four-week interval between the index case and the second case appears overly long given a typical incubation period for adenovirus infections of no more than 1 week [43]. This may be explained by our finding of a high rate of subclinical infection by TMAdV in asymptomatic titi monkeys (35%), but may also be due to separate introductions of TMAdV into the colony from an as-yet unidentified reservoir.
Our study data also support the potential for cross-species transmission of TMAdV between monkeys and humans. The researcher’s fever, cough, and pleuritic symptoms (‘‘burning sensation in the lungs’’) are consistent with the development of a prolonged viral respiratory illness. Interestingly, pleurisy has been specifically reported in association with certain human adenovirus infections [44]. The clinical presentation, time of illness concurrent with the onset of the outbreak, and presence of neutralizing Abs in convalescent serum all strongly point to primary infection of the researcher by TMAdV. The detection of weakly neutralizing Abs (1:8) in a serum sample from a sick family member of the researcher also suggests that TMAdV may be capable of human- to-human transmission. The decreased levels of neutralizing Abs to TMAdV in the researcher (1:32) and a family member (1:8) relative to those in infected titi monkeys (up to .1:512) are consistent with a recent study showing much higher levels of neutralizing antibodies in chimpanzees than in humans with adenovirus infections, possibly due to more robust adenovirus- specific T-cell responses in humans than in monkeys [45].
Several lines of evidence support the contention that the direction of TMAdV transmission was zoonotic (monkeys to humans) rather than anthroponotic (humans to monkeys). First, the closest known relative to TMAdV in GenBank is SAdV-3, an Old World monkey adenovirus (Fig. 3; Table 2). Second, our results show that PCR assays for human adenoviruses in common use are capable of detecting TMAdV. Although sequencing of PCR amplicons for human adenoviruses is not performed routinely in diagnostic virology, TMAdV would presumably have been detected previously in large-scale studies of hexon sequencing of Ad field isolates if it were circulating in the community [46,47]. Finally, the available sequence data in GenBank is heavily biased towards human adenoviruses, and much less is known about the potential diversity of the simian adenoviruses. We also cannot formally exclude the possibility that the outbreak arose from anthroponotic transmission. In our study, 2 of 81, or 2.5% of random adult blood donors exhibited borderline titers of neutralizing antibody to TMAdV, indicating either a low prevalence of TMAdV in the human population or cross-reactivity to a related virus (although no evidence of cross-reactivity was found with HAdV serotypes 1 through 35). Future large-scale studies of TMAdV seroepidemiol- ogy will be needed to better understand transmission of TMAdV between monkeys and humans. Nevertheless, our discovery of TMAdV, a novel adenovirus with the capacity to cross species barriers, highlights the need to monitor adenoviruses closely for outbreak or even pandemic potential.

his study was carried out in strict accordance with the recommendations in the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals of the National Institutes of Health. The use and care of all animals followed policies and guidelines established by the University of California, Davis Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) and CNPRC (Animal Welfare Assurance #A3433-01). The protocol for the mainte- nance and breeding of the titi monkey colony was approved by the University of California, Davis IACUC (Protocol #15730). No specific animal research protocol was drafted for this study, as only excess clinical samples were analyzed for diagnostic purposes. Animals in extreme respiratory distress were humanely euthanized by veterinarians. Extensive veterinary care was provided to all animals affected by the outbreak in order to minimize pain and distress.
Serum samples from staff at the CNPRC, close contacts, and random adult blood donors were collected under protocols approved by institutional review boards of the University of California, Davis (Protocol #200917650-1) and University of California, San Francisco (Protocol #H49187-35245-01). Specif- ically, written informed consent was obtained from staff at the CNPRC and close contacts for analysis of their samples. Any potentially identifying information has been provided with the explicit permission of the individuals involved.
Sera from random blood donors were obtained from the Blood Systems Research Institute (San Francisco, CA); sera were derived from affiliated donor banks in California (Blood Centers of the Pacific, San Francisco, CA), Nevada (United Blood Service, Reno, NV), and Wyoming (United Blood Services, Cheyenne, Wyoming) and de-identified prior to analysis.
The California National Primate Research Center (CNPRC)
The California National Primate Research Center (CNPRC), which houses over 5,000 nonhuman primates, is a part of the National Primate Research Centers Program and is accredited by the Association for the Assessment and Accreditation of Labora- tory Animal Care, International (AAALAC). At the beginning of 2009, the CNPRC maintained a colony of 74 titi monkeys (Callicebus cupreus) and a colony of over 4,500 rhesus macaques (Macaca mulatta). No new animals have been introduced into either colony for over 2 years. All titi monkeys are maintained in small social groups, while rhesus macaques are maintained in small or large social groups. All animal facilities are maintained in compliance with United States Department of Agriculture specifications.
Eighty-eight percent of the titi monkey population (n = 65) were housed in 1 quadrant of an indoor animal building, and all titi monkeys demonstrating clinical signs originated from this building (i.e. ‘‘at-risk’’ room) (Fig. 1A). Rhesus macaques (n=133) were housed in the other 3 quadrants of this same building, and surrounding the building were outdoor housing units with rhesus macaques and cynomolgus macaques (Macaca fasicularis). Three additional titi monkeys were moved into the at-risk room less than 2 weeks after presentation of the index case, reflecting a total at- risk population of 68 animals. The remaining 6 titi monkeys were housed in an indoor animal building greater than 500 yards from the at-risk population (i.e. ‘‘minimal-risk’’ room).
Outbreak investigation and microbiological testing
The outbreak lasted approximately 3 months from May to August of 2009. Affected titi monkeys died from 3–24 days after appearance of clinical signs, with an average time to death or humane euthanasia of 8 days. Clinical and epidemiological data, including daily census reports, were tracked and recorded by veterinary and management staff. All personnel entering the titi monkey rooms (both at-risk rooms and minimal-risk rooms) needed to pass within approximately 20 feet of macaque enclosures prior to entry. CNPRC personal protective equipment (PPE) policy requires a change of PPE between entrance/exit of animal rooms housing different species. Staff compliance of this policy may have been compromised. Measures have since been taken by CNPRC management to ensure compliance with existing policies.
Bacterial, mycoplasma, and fungal cultures were performed at the CNPRC. Clinical samples were also sent to an outside laboratory (Focus Diagnostics, Cypress, CA) for respiratory viral testing by centrifugation-enhanced shell vial culture followed by direct fluorescent antibody staining for 8 viruses (respiratory syncytial virus, adenovirus, influenza virus A and B, parainfluenza virus types 1, 2, and 3, and human metapneumovirus).